Orch Docs Landing Page Clarity, Add transactional vs portfolio (#1271)
Agoric/documentation: main/guides/orchestration/txvsportfolio.md

# Transactional vs. Portfolio Contracts

In Agoric Orchestration, **transactional contracts** and **portfolio contracts** serve distinct use

> cases. This section explains their differences and provides examples from real contracts.

Reviewer: Another take:

----

Agoric Orchestration supports both **transactional contracts** for single interactions and
**portfolio contracts** for rich, persistent user positions. The [send-anywhere contract](https://github.com/guides/orchestration/contract-walkthroughs/send-anywhere) is typical of transactional contracts: each offer is an independent interaction. `auto-stake-it` is typical of portfolio contracts: users have long-lived state.

----

> cases. This section explains their differences and provides examples from real contracts.

Author: I like the second one and am going to adopt it for now.

Table: Comparison of Transactional and Portfolio Contracts in Agoric Orchestration

## Transactional Contracts

**Transactional contracts** perform one-shot actions, e.g., swapping tokens or sending them from one
chain to another. Each use is typically triggered by a single transaction, after which there is no
long-lived state managed by the contract for that user.

**Characteristics**:

- **Initiation**: Usually initiated by a single transaction from the user or external source.
- **No per-user account**: The contract does not maintain persistent user-specific state.
- **No smart wallet requirement**: Users often do not require a dedicated on-chain account.
- **One-shot**: The operation typically starts and finishes in a single interaction.

### Example: "Send Anywhere" Contract

The `send-anywhere` contract illustrates how a user can send tokens from Agoric to another chain in
one action. Under the hood, it exposes an `invitation` that, when exercised, moves tokens once and
does not maintain any further user-specific state.

**Key Points**:

- The contract exposes a single `makeSendInvitation` method that returns an Invitation.

> - Users deposit tokens into the contract just for this one transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Users offer tokens to the contract just for this one transaction.
```

A distinctive feature of our system is that users do _not_ (typically) deposit tokens into contracts. The tokens are escrowed with Zoe.

OTOH, orch contracts such as this one have to put the tokens into a cosmos-level local orchestration account, and they have to withdraw them from a seat in order to do so. I think Zoe only allows this when the `want` is empty. So it's effectively a deposit in this case. But I still prefer that we avoid "users deposit...".

Author: I agree with the argument, not so much with the conclusion. I will change it if you feel strongly about it.

Reviewer: I guess I don't feel strongly about it.

I'm interested in @Chris-Hibbert 's take.

Reviewer 2: > orch contracts such as this one have to put the tokens into a cosmos-level local orchestration account, and they have to withdraw them from a seat in order to do so.

Yeah, I don't think there's much point  in emphasizing Zoe's escrow aspect when we're not relying on offer-safety.

- After the tokens are sent, the seat concludes and there is no ongoing position to manage.

Below is a simplified snippet adapted from the flows (`send-anywhere.flows.js`) showing the essence
of the transactional flow:

```js
/**
 * Example flow for a transactional contract:
 *
 * @param {ZCFSeat} seat - The user's seat, including the tokens to send.
 * @param {string} chainName - Name of the destination chain.

>  * @param {string} destAddr - Destination address on the chain.

Reviewer: **correctness**
the JSDoc doesn't correspond to the code. Fix it or drop it.

Author: Good catch. Dropped.

 */
export const sendIt = async (
  orch,
  { sharedLocalAccountP, log, zoeTools },
  seat,
  { chainName, destAddr }
) => {
  // 1. Extract the single token amount from the proposal.
  const { give } = seat.getProposal();

>   const [[_, amount]] = Object.entries(give);

Reviewer: This "don't care" style of amount keyword is not typical. Let's show a typical usage:

```suggestion
  const { In: amount } = give;
```

  // 2. Transfer the tokens into a local account that can initiate the IBC transfer.
  await zoeTools.localTransfer(seat, sharedLocalAccountP, give);

  // 3. Execute the cross-chain transfer.

>   await sharedLocalAccountP.transfer(
>     { value: destAddr, chainId: (await orch.getChain(chainName)).chainId },

Reviewer: `await` in a subexpression seems overly complex.

```suggestion
  const { chainId } = await orch.getChain(chainName);
  await sharedLocalAccountP.transfer(
    { value: destAddr, chainId },
```

perhaps move `const { chainId } = await orch.getChain(chainName);` up under step 1.

    { denom, value: amount.value }
  );

  // 4. Finish. No persistent state is stored for this user.
  seat.exit();
};
```

In this snippet, we perform the following steps:

> 1. **Extract token Detailss**: The user's seat provides the tokens details (_amount_, _brand_) in a single `give`.

Reviewer: **correctness**
amount includes a brand. you could say "amount, i.e. brand and value"

Author: Fixed.

> 1. **Extract token Detailss**: The user's seat provides the tokens details (_amount_, _brand_) in a single `give`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Extract token Details**: The user's seat provides the tokens details (_amount_, _brand_) in a single `give`.
```

> 2. **Send via localAccount**: A local account is used only as a helper to transfer funds from `seat` to an ICA account.

Reviewer: have we explained what a local account is? if so, link to it. if not:

```suggestion
2. **Send via localAccount**: An account on the local Agoric chain is used only as a helper to transfer funds from `seat` to an ICA account.
```

action (sending tokens) and does not maintain any ongoing user state. The user interacts once, and
the contract concludes the operation. This contract is discussed in more detail in the
[`send-anywhere` contract walkthrough](/guides/orchestration/contract-walkthroughs/send-anywhere).

## Portfolio Contracts

**Portfolio contracts** manage long-lived user state and support multiple interactions over time.
They resemble "vaults": you open a portfolio (or vault) position, then manipulate or monitor it as
desired.

**Characteristics**:

- **Persistent per-user state**: Each user typically has their own account.
- **Multiple user actions**: The state can be updated with each new user action.
- **Orchestration Flows**: Users often interact through orchestration flows.
- **Onboarding**: Users first deposit tokens into a personal portfolio for management.

### Example: "Auto Stake It" Contract

The `auto-stake-it` contract demonstrates how to continuously manage a user's positions. A user
"onboards" into the contract by creating accounts on multiple chains (via orchestration) and then
depositing tokens to be staked automatically.

Key points in code:

> 1. **Prepare a PortfolioHolder** that stores each user's accounts in a single structure.

Reviewer: The code here doesn't include the prepare step.

```suggestion
1. **Make a PortfolioHolder** that stores each user's accounts in a single structure.
```

To "prepare" is to set up the PortfolioHolder `exoClass` (_I think._). When making an instance, just say "make".

    return portfolioHolder.asContinuingOffer();
};
```

In this snippet, we create multiple accounts (one for Agoric, one for the remote chain).
Then, the contract uses `makePortfolioHolder` to maintain these in a persistent store.
Users can perform multiple future actions without losing state. Learn more about the
`makePortfolioHolder` function in the [`makePortfolioHolder` Orchestration API reference](https://agoric-sdk.pages.dev/funcs/_agoric_orchestration.preparePortfolioHolder).

## Choosing Between Transactional and Portfolio

Use **transactional contracts** (like "send-anywhere") when:

- You want a **single-shot interaction** (e.g. a swap, a cross-chain send).
- No ongoing user state is needed.
- The user wants minimal overhead (no dedicated on-chain structure).

Use **portfolio contracts** (like "auto-stake-it") when:

- You need **long-lived, multi-step interactions** (e.g. staking, compounding).
- Each user needs a separate sub-account or position.
- User state must persist (e.g., "my tokens remain staked until I withdraw").

Agoric Orchestration supports both **transactional contracts** for single interactions and

> **portfolio contracts** for rich, persistent user positions. Use the pattern that best fits

Reviewer: The 1st sentence of this para does a good job of motivating the complexity. I wonder about moving it to the top of the page.
